---
title: "everything you need to know to start applying business analytics"
date: "2018-03-26"
categories: 
  - "market-research"
  - "strategy-optimization"
coverImage: "how-to-business-analytics.jpg"
---

### **Post date: 26/03/2018**

**Table of contents**

- [What is business analytics](#What-is-business-analytics)
- [Concepts you need to dominate](#Concepts-you-need-to-dominate)
    - [Big data](#Big-data)
    - [Business intelligence](#Business-intelligence)
    - [Metric](#Metric)
    - [Kpi](#Kpi)
    - [Causative qualitative information](#Causative-qualitative-information)
- [Why is it in your interest to start applying business analytics in your business process?](#how-to-start-aplying-it)
- [Types of business analytics](#Types-of-business-analytics)
    - [Descriptive analytics](#Descriptive-analytics)
    - [Predictive analytics](#Predictive-analytics)
    - [Prescriptive analytics](#Prescriptive-analytics)
- [How to implement descriptive analytics](#How-to-implement-descriptive-analytics)
    - [Information you need to gather from your activity](#Information-you-need)
    - [North star metric](#North-star)
- [Ways to convert that information into data](#ways-to-convert-data)
    - [Technological programming](#Technological-programming)
    - [Human programming](#Human-programming)
- [Examples of application](#Examples-of-application)

 

# **What is business analytics?**

It’s a term used to refer to the constant study of information generated by a company through its existence and activity. All businesses generate information one way or the other, even without realizing it. Just by completing a sale, by trying to complete it, by using commercial strategy planned or not, the business generates information.

The study of this information and it’s processing transforms it to data (basically, information mindfully registered and prepared to be of use in the future).

Business analytics is nothing more than the constant effort of our organization, of processing information generated by its activity into data to finally extract from it useful and applicable knowledge. This knowledge has no other purpose than improving business strategy effectiveness.

This post wants to be the perfect introduction for this.

## **Concepts you need to dominate:**

 

### **Big data**

**It literally means: "an abundance of data". Ironically, it would be expected for such a trend word to have a more useful meaning, but ultimately, it’s nothing more than a reference to that information we talked before, contemplated through it´s characteristic of being a big quantity of data, processed and not.**

 

What it is useful is what was born from this concept, the constant search companies do to possess systems that analyze the biggest possible quantity of information, as efficiently as possible. Obviously, business analytics will be better applied and translated in a bigger competitive advantage depending on how much information can it convert to data (more data means potentially more knowledge, and with knowledge comes power, my dear padawan). So big data processing systems become essential in the process of business analytics.

### **Business intelligence**

**Kind of a synonym to "business analytics". As a concept, business intelligence refers to the knowledge the company already has after applying business analytics. In practice, however, it refers to the business analytics methodologies and processes that we analyze here. That's why it’s "kind of" a synonym.**

### **Metric**

The metric is a concept that allows us to assign certain data an objectively positive or negative value for our global objectives. Numeric value: Everything that can be measured numerically is metrics, and they are important because they allow us to separate information with 100% objective value, and information whose value might change from the point of view (qualitative value).

 

### **KPI: Key Performance Indicators**

They represent those metrics that are especially important, essential to understand objectively what is the ongoing situation in which a company is. The coolest of them metrics.

 

### **Causative qualitative information**

 

This expression was fabricated by me, as I didn’t find a more accurate expression, though personally, I believe it’s not irrelevant at all. We don’t only need objective information, on the contrary, even though numbers can tell us with certainty "what happened", what we actually need to make data-driven decision making is to understand thoroughly the reason "why it happened". Asking yourself this immediately takes you to the million dollar question: "why the people that affected X situation (sale, negotiation, process, etc.) took the decisions they took?"

 

Understanding a market is no other thing than understanding the people that affected, why they act how they act.Thus, obtaining a qualitative, subjective information directly from those people point of view is a must, if you want to have a complete business intelligence.

 

## **Why is it in your interest to start NOW to apply business analytics in your business process?**

Because it allows you to commit to the minimum quantity of mistakes in the long run. The better control you have on your own success and what causes it, the more certainties you will obtain to repeat them or generate new ones, evade or eliminate failures. This of courses, impacts directly on your wallet. The greater knowledge you are able to create from your own experience, a more substantial competitive advantage you will have going for you when new, less practised competitors arise. Especially since they are not able to measure as effectively as you do because you follow this blog. ;) .

 

## **Types of business analytics**

Basically, there are three types, also known as the three phases an organization might find itself in, depending on the level of technology it manages.

#### **Descriptive analytics**

We analyze the events that have occurred in the past and their cause. It is the first phase of business analytics, and the methodology that implies requires a lower level of technology. Basically, we understand the cause of those events objectively as possible, to help obtain a better global understanding of the things that surround and interest our business.

 

This one shall be the one we will centre the most on this article, as the following two require the use of complex math, algorithms, programming and a specialized team that no way I can replace just with this post (sorry guys, I’m not THAT good)

For the moment, I´ll just define them, to make sure at least you know they exist.

 

#### **Predictive analytics**

With that knowledge about the past obtained through descriptive analytics, we employ math and informatics systems that allow us to process information and generated data about realities that haven’t yet occurred in the market. Fundamentally, we are able to predict the data we will generate, relating it to observed characteristics and patterns registered in the data we already own. This way, we can anticipate situations before they even happen.

#### **Prescriptive analytics**

Lastly, this one consists of using that knowledge obtained thus far, to make strategic decisions in a completely automated manner. With an accurate data-based prediction and a data-based optimized decision, risks of failure and mistakes on the process are reduced drastically. **Automate decision process**

## **How to implement descriptive analytics**

 

### **Information you need to start gathering from your activity**

Here I try to summarize the measurements that I see as essential. Even so, each sector and market is different and each organization has different levels of resources. As I said, the least for me to actually be able to optimize business strategy and scale it, are the following. I distinguish between two types of information, qualitative data, and metrics.

#### **Essential qualitative measurements**

- A/B/C clients: consist of clients classification into three categories, using the market segments we know exist. We obtain intelligence about the clients that currently buy our products representing them depending on the level of revenue they represent for us.

 

- The better we profile the buyer persona inside the market segments, the more value this analysis will give. Client segments that represent 60% of our revenue become our A clients, our main target audience. Segments that represent 30% become our B client, and the rest of them, representing the remaining 10% are C clients.

 

- Understanding the differences in characteristics and needs of the different clients, and the quality they represent to our business help us prioritize our marketing efforts, understand our positioning on the market and make customer relations more profitable and efficient.

 

- A/B/C business models (or products): On the other hand, the products or business models A/B/C (depending on the type of company) correspond to those businesses models/products that represent A, 60% of the turnover, B 30% and C 10% of their turnover. It may be especially necessary for each of these models to have A/B/C client classes of their own. As the case before, it allows a company to focus their efforts on that which is especially profitable and less risky.

 

- Causes of loyalty of these clients and repetition: Although they are very similar, it is important to differentiate them. We talk about causes of loyalty to refer to those reasons that justify what the customer likes more of a company. What is it that he remembers when asked: "What do you like most about us/our product/our service".

 

- The cause of repetition of the clients refers mainly to the reasons why they repeat (duh). Try to understand it from a statistical approach, what elements of our value proposition are essential for them, and what we need to keep doing to help them stay satisfied. They can be the same as the causes of loyalty in most cases, but even so, it’s useful and insightful to analyze them with a different process.

 

- The reason behind this is because many times the method of obtaining this information is through a survey or personal contact when we ask "what do you like most about such product, activity or just us"  the client might be more prone to emotional answers unlike asking "why do you repeat the purchase". In the latter question, just by how it is formulated,it can lead the customer to rationalize more their response. To do branding we are very interested in emotional responses, but rational ones are also important when analyzing product utility, thus, the most effective thing to do is to treat the processes as different.

 

- Negative customers: who they are and the features they have. They are those who refuse to use our product or stop using it. What we are trying to understand ideally is the contrary of our target audience, the audience that would be the biggest waste of efforts to try to sell. Understanding the characteristics and needs that these customers have and their differences respect our A/B/C clients, give us the possibility to choose whether it is worthwhile or not. Would investing in satisfying them be better for us than to voluntarily try to stop onboarding them? Only if the necessary corrections would not harm our customers A/B/C, and the cost of the same is an acceptable investment.

 

- Causes of customer abandonment: It is important to understand the statistical majority of the causes of abandonment or refusal. It allows us to see if there is anything that can or cannot be done. It could be because he is a negative client, or because he finds a flaw in the value proposition that we don’t have contemplated.

#### **Metrics: Essential quantitative measurements**

The more segmented by business model and market segments they are, the better.

- Repeat rate of use of a client (if possible, of all): the number of times during a period, which the same customer (and I mean costumer, not segment) uses a product or service (if the payment is unique) or repurchases it (if it is a single use per purchase).
- Abandonment rate of a particular time period, the number of clients that stop using a product.
- Lead bounce rate: Number of possible clients that refuse to even try or use the product for a first time.
- Fluctuations in use and abandonment of the same customer: if there are periods of use or purchase, seasonality, etc. Measuring in clear time periods (days, weeks, months, etc.) How much they repeat allows statistical data to be taken in large quantities. It is important to have a database system that allows you to give different IDs to the clients, so that they can be identified in all their purchases and periods of silence.
- New acquisition per period: The number of new customers for a given time, foreigners to the database mentioned previously.
- Rate of repetition of a period: the number of repeated purchases that occurred in a period of time.
- Recommendation Rate per period: the number of times customers recommended your product to acquaintances during a period of time.
- Origin, source/medium of clients: Where they come from and how the new acquisitions originated.
- Average Invoice of purchase: What is the average quantity of money that customers spend when buying from us.
- ROI of paid acquisition channels: By having measured origin, we can calculate how many clients are obtained for each euro invested in each channel, and how much money is obtained corresponding to the same. The return of our economic investment.
- ROI in time of all activity: how much time in hours, do different activities take that allow the company to generate economic profitability. What is the team's real hourly wage?
- Activation rate: In software, activation is the process by which a client starts to use a product or service until he discovers the value proposition (VP). It’s an important metric that allows to differentiate clients that abandon discovering  VP (problem is then, the relation between client and proposal) and the clients that abandon before even discovering it (problem could be communication and user experience, if client takes too much time in discovering, the sale funnel is longer with bigger bounce rate). This activation rate measures how many clients of the ones obtained on a period, have actually activated the product).
- Sales: What is the amount of sales that were generated over a period of time. You can classify them or differentiate them between new acquisition sales or repetition.
- Variable and Fixed Costs: The higher the cost variability is, the better chances a company has to be efficient and model an effective pricing strategy. Dividing the fixed cost between the expected units sold (using scenario planning) is a good way  to vary fixed costs.
- Revenue: nothing to add here that one cannot assume already
- Profit: Same like previous point
- Experiments’ results carried out as campaigns (hypothesis testing): It is highly important that all the conducted campaign are based on results’ expectations. You shouldn’t perform any commercial activity only to ‘get through with it’, they should have an actual hypothesis (why do you believe that this method for your price/product/communication etc. policy is going to be effective). All this has to be documented, both in cases of success or failure, because we have to understand the reason behind such results.  

 

### **The North Star Metric (NSM)**

As we have seen when implementing metrics and KPI measurements, there is a lot to do, which can result in a real headache if we do not have enough human or technological resources that can carry them out. For this reason, a basic exercise that you can sense clearly is always to prioritize in gathering those metrics that you believe are of a greater degree of importance for the advancement of the company’s current situation. The NSM concept is useful to place certain KPIs in an important guiding role in helping the business grow. We can understand this better by the following two examples.

An organization will not have the same star if it is still in a beta or gamma phase, that hasn’t yet recognized what its value is or how they can contribute to the competitive market. In this case, the most important metric to show success isn’t the sales nor the acquisition of new clients; but retention rate, loyalty and customer satisfaction are prioritized.

 

In the other example, a business that has been in the market for some time has already found its ideal positioning, market segment or what is required to achieve its goals. In this case, the metric star is the new acquisition, therefore the organization is rather in a **phase of scalability**.

Of course, the ideal is to have all the essential measurements we have discussed above measured at all circumstances. However, having a clear priority becomes especially useful in situations of low budget, lack of resources or time.

### **Ways to convert such information into data:**

We have seen so far that there are two elements that can be measured. On the one hand, there is qualitative information, information resulting from human intuition. This type of information does not have a natural mathematical and measurable root per se. It is our task to transform it into quantitative data by the means of statistics.

 

On the other hand, we have metrics that are completely mathematical and they do not require direct contact with what is being measured (the clients). We only need a methodical organization of information and the use of mathematics and basic arithmetics to achieve it.

 

With these two types of information, so different from each other to measure, it comes as no surprise to know we reduce the data collection process into two types: automatic/computer processes or human processes. **Technological Programming**

In essence, we are talking about programming at every level. It can be basic programming such as the formulas and tables of an excel sheet, that measure by adding and subtracting the results we are looking for. For example, measuring complex schedules such as people’s interest who are visiting the website through Google Analytics, or more complex information collection systems.

Basic technology programming tools you can start using now:

- Excel: Nothing to comment here right? 
- Google Analytics: shortly, a basic course of video tutorials about analytics will be prepared. Nevertheless, there are a vast number of articles on Google about how to implement Analytics. A good source is https://www.jeffalytics.com/
- Web application Statistics: Facebook, Instagram, etc.  No configuration is required on your part, just to use those pages where your data has been prepared. however, it has the disadvantage of not being customizable.

**Human Programming**

When we talk about human programming we are referring to the actions that are carried out by a team, the people that contribute in the buying and selling process, taking advantage of the information that is generating their activity by recording it. This information automatically is processed to be converted into data. We are talking about human information gathering systems. They have the main advantage to be highly adaptable and creative, practically we can obtain all the information that we require. Its drawback is that it requires consistency and collaboration from all stakeholders.

Four basic forms:

1. Surveys: Questions ordered and structured so that the person answers as one thinks more convenient, without any control or guide in the process from our part. An advantage is that it is easily scalable. An inconvenience is that its repeated use generates apathy (boredom to fill it), it can tire the person if a lot of information is asked, and since they are not guided, there is more room for error (not understanding the question asked).
2. Interviews: Asking and guiding the person in order to give us the best quality information. It gives us the possibility to see their reactions, their initiative or dissent, the level of interest or empathy they that have, among others. The main drawback is that it is time-consuming, but if it is done well, it brings about a lot of qualitative information, which is by far considered as the best source of qualitative information.
3. Results record: Objective registry of information after carrying out a process. It can be filled out both by quantitative or qualitative information. It can only be applied to activities with regular processes and methodologies, in this way limiting the obtained information.
4. Processes’ information and conclusion record: subjects are observed and their behavior is recorded. Its drawback is that only the mere presence of the observer may alter the regular behavior of the subjects, thus tarnishing data. Resources, effort, and time are required to create a perfect scenario for observation.

 

### **Examples of application** 

It is understandable that a lot of information can be overwhelming and thus it is difficult to start applying these collection systems. In this video, we will discuss examples of the application of human systems and their registration in excel.

<iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/CTgPmk_AJc8" width="560" height="315" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen"></iframe>
